Collas Crill commentary on Hasting-Bass rule 28-May-25

In response to a fast-changing and unpredictable world, important
decisions about how best to structure and shelter private wealth can
sometimes be forced upon trustees and UHNW families
unexpectedly.
  
Families and trustees may often feel compelled to react under acute
time pressure and with limited information. The 2024 decision of the
UK to abolish its 'non-dom' regime, for decades the cornerstone of
UK/offshore wealth planning, has forced many wealthy families to
consider relocating themselves and radically restructuring their
assets in response.
  
It is not uncommon – particularly where rapid and radical changes
interact with complex tax rules – that oversights and mistakes occur
with unforeseen consequences. Fortunately, where transactions
involve Jersey trusts, there are options available to trustees and
UHNW families to set aside transactions, entered into on the basis of
a mistake, misunderstanding or other serious error.
This article explores the options available, outlining the
considerations, benefits and drawbacks of each.

Two typical routes to set aside transactions
There are typically two potential routes to set aside a transaction
where there has been a mistake or other error in establishing a trust
or during the course of its administration:

Mistake, typically relevant when looking at how a trust has
been established by a settlor but also relevant to trustees who
make a mistake; and
The 'Hastings-Bass' rule, typically involving the actions and
decisions of trustees and power holders once a trust has been
established, eg distributions, restructuring etc.

In Jersey, both have been placed on a statutory footing in Art 47A-J
Trusts (Jersey) Law 1984. Similar mechanisms exist to set aside
transactions involving trusts in Guernsey, BVI and Cayman.

Setting aside transactions subject to a mistake in Jersey
In Jersey, the general principle is that a transaction executed by a
settlor or a trustee can be set aside on the basis of mistake if the
relevant mistake is sufficiently material to the transaction that it
impacts the fundamental validity of the transaction and it is
reasonable for the transaction to be set aside.
This remedy can be of enormous assistance to settlors of Jersey
trusts, to trustees and other fiduciaries as well as, potentially,
beneficiaries.
Jersey law takes a practical and flexible approach to the type of
mistake that can vitiate transactions involving a trusts and trustees.
While mistakes as to the tax effects or consequences of a transaction
are common, there are other examples, including:

any mistake as to any advantage to be gained by the transfer of
property or from to a trust;

any mistake as to the exercise of a particular power; and

any mistake as to a fact existing or not existing at the time of
(or before) the transfer disposition or the exercise of a power.
It is not a requirement to show that any person lacked care or was
otherwise responsible for the mistake coming about in order to seek
to have the transaction set aside. This can avoid lengthy and
expensive arguments and potentially having to sue professional
advisors.

The 'Hastings-Bass' rule in Jersey
The 'Hastings-Bass' rule gives The Royal Court of Jersey (the Court)
discretion to set aside an exercise of power – and any resulting

transaction involving a trust – if it is clear that the trustee would not
have acted as they did if the trustee had either:

failed to take into account relevant considerations which the
trustee ought to have taken into account when exercising the
power; or

took into account considerations which should properly have
been disregarded.
In Jersey, the 'Hastings-Bass' rule has been placed on a statutory
footing to have the broadest possible application to a very wide
number of circumstances affecting trustees.
The relevant considerations may be advice from a professional
advisor which ought to have been followed or, equally, incorrect
advice that should not have been followed. However, any material
consideration that the trustee has not properly considered (or the
inverse – an irrelevant consideration to which the trustee has given
too great a weight) are capable of giving grounds to have a
transaction set aside.
Examples of transactions that have been set aside include cases
where:

a trustee or settlor exercises a power over assets subject to a
mistake such as misunderstanding of the tax implications of a
transaction or failing to realise the impact of a particular
decision on the trust’s beneficiaries;

a trustee exercised a power to transfer and restructure assets,
for the purposes of trying to avoid reporting requirements
under French tax and deferral of the potential tax liabilities
which would otherwise have been incurred in relation to the
assets of the trusts; and

the trustee or settlor did not have the necessary knowledge to
make an informed decision, and it is shown that the decision
would have been different had the correct facts or legal
understanding been in place.

These examples are touchstones of the overarching principle of
ensuring that the trust is administered in accordance with its terms
and the trustee's fiduciary duties. The Court's discretion to set aside
reflects the overarching duty of trustees always to act and exercise
their powers prudently in the best interests of the beneficiaries, and
ensures that a mistake in the decision-making process does not
negatively bind the trust to an outcome that would be detrimental to
the beneficiaries.
  
Where there has been a mistake, the Court’s general view is that a
beneficiary’s sole remedy should not be litigation against trustees
and/or advisors, in circumstances where the beneficiary is not
usually at fault and has already incurred loss by reason of an
avoidable tax charge. Forcing a beneficiary to incur further expense
in what may be uncertain litigation is unnecessary, undesirable and
unjust.
  
The Court will not make an order to set aside a transaction which
would prejudice a bona fide purchaser for value of any trust property
without notice of the matters which make the transfer of trust
property or the exercise of power in relation to trust property
voidable.
  
While applications are generally conducted in private (withholding
the names of the affected beneficiaries), the Court will usually
require, as part of such applications, that any relevant tax authority
is put on notice of the application.

Who can apply?
An application to set aside transactions on the basis of either mistake
or the 'Hastings-Bass' rule can be made by:

a settlor (or his personal representatives if deceased);
a trustee;
a beneficiary or an enforcer of a trust; or

any other person with permission of the Court.

Practical considerations for clients
Trustees and settlors should ensure that they fully understand the
tax and legal implications of their decisions and that they have
received proper advice (from relevant lawyers and tax professionals)
to minimise the risk of a mistake or misunderstanding which might
mean a transaction has to be set aside.
  
Where mistakes occur, the Court's ability to set aside transactions
involving trusts, and its pragmatic approach to such questions is of
considerable value to settlors, trustees and beneficiaries of Jersey
trusts, allowing mistakes to be corrected without undue complexity
or restriction.
  
Moreover, there are nuances to how these rules operate between
Jersey and other offshore jurisdictions such as Guernsey, BVI and the
Cayman Islands. These distinctions can be highly relevant where
there are cross-jurisdictional interests, structures or assets.
